Report on Upākhyāna & Kīrtana by Dharmaprachāraka Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy in BeṅgaĪūru, Puṇe, Sāntācruz and Dādar Sabhā-s (August 2023)
Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām, Dharmaprachāraka of Shrī Chitrāpur Mat͟h, was invited to BeṅgaĪūru Sabhā, Puṇe Sabhā, Sāntācruz Sabhā and Dādar Sabhā recently to deliver his Upākhyāna  and Kīrtana. Here are some reports and photos.
BeṅgaĪūru: 4th, 5th, 6th August 2023
Upākhyāna & Kīrtana by Dharmaprachāraka Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy at Shrī Chitrāpur Mat͟h, BeṅgaĪūru
by Sandhyā Nāyel, BeṅgaĪūru
As part of the Chāturmāsa evening programmes during the Adhika Shrāvaṇa māsa in the BeṅgaĪūru Math, Dharmaprachāraka - Shrī Chitrāpur Mat͟h, Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām was invited by BeṅgaĪūru Local Sabhā for three days – 4th, 5th and 6th August 2023 to give talks and perform Kīrtana at Shrī Chitrāpur Mat͟h, BeṅgaĪūru. The laity experienced an enriching three days of shravaṇa, manana and chintana inspired by him.
Day 1 - 4th August 2023 
Commentary and brief explanation of Shiva Mahimna Stotra
It was a lively and enjoyable hour of stories brought to life from the Purāṇā-s, some of which we had heard in our childhood but now understood with new perspectives of Bhakti and Sharaṇāgati. Chaitanya mām beautifully narrated the story of Pus͟hpadantāchārya who composed the Shiva Mahimna Stotra and the compelling situation leading to this beautiful composition. He brought out that we must always know that it is the Divine who is working through us and we are the "nimitta mātra". This will help keep our ahaṅkāra in check. We must always remember that all our actions and the results thereof are an offering at the Lotus Feet of our Guru.  
Day 2 - 5th August 2023
Appayyā Diks͟hitār Kathā 
This great master composer of innumerable stotra-s was an incarnation of Lord Shiva. His inspiring life was beautifully narrated by Chaitanya mām in his inimitable manner. It was interspersed with beautiful anecdotes from Sant Appayā’s life and bhāvapūrṇa bhajana-s.
Day 3 - 6th August 2023
Kīrtana on "Guru Mahimā"
Dressed in the traditional attire as a Kīrtanākāra, wearing the "pheṭā"(turban/headgear) and "shāllŏ"(shawl), and playing the "tāĪa" (cymbals), Chaitanya mām treated us to the Nāradīya style of  kīrtana on "Guru Mahimā". 
He lucidly explained the true meaning of Sadguru and Their Kimayā - The Guru who removes the darkness of ignorance and ushers in the light of knowledge. The Guru who is to be prostrated to, even before bowing down to God for Guru is the One who shows us the path to God.
  
Chaitanya mām beautifully narrated the life and times of Sant Nāmdev to illustrate the subject of Guru Mahimā. He also mentioned incidents from the life of Sant Tukārām. He interspersed his narration with beautiful Abhaṅga-s and Nāmasmaraṇa-s engaging the audience, making the entire sabhāgṛha, bhaktimaya and amṛtamaya. 
Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy  mām was felicitated by the Sabhā President Chaitanya Shiroor mām.  Everyone present felt blessed to listen to the traditional and mesmerizing Kīrtana after a very long time. We are looking forward to Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām's next visit!!!

We are truly grateful that Chaitanya mām could come and present his Upākhyāna) and Kīrtana to the BeṅgaĪūru sādhaka-s and augment our Chāturmāsa Sādhanā.
Day 1 Upākhyāna) on Shiva Mahimna stotra
 Day 2 - Appayyā Diks͟hitār Kathā
 Day 3 – Kīrtana on "Guru Mahimā"
 Dr Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām being felicitated by BeṅgaĪūru Sabhā 
President, Shrī Chaitanya Shiroor
 Pune: 12th, 13th August 2023   
Talk on Shiva Mahimna Stotra and the Kathā of Shrī Appayā Diks͟hitār 
by Smt. Prīti PaṇemaṅgaĪor, Puṇe
The sacred period of Chāturmāsa, is a time to turn inward and try to understand the Divine teachings of our Guru and Shāstra-s. H.H. Swāmījī guides us to increase our individual sādhanā as well as learn about our scriptures. 
The Puṇe Local Sabhā invited Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām, Dharmaprachāraka, Shrī Chitrāpur Mat͟h, on 12th and 13th August 2023, to give us insight into the Shiva Mahimna Stotra and narrate the Kathā of Shrī Appayā Diks͟hitār over two days.
Both these sessions were absolutely brilliant. Chaitanya mām has a way of making each subject very interesting in his inimitable style. The expositions were enhanced with anecdotes and stories from our Purāṇā-s. 
Dr. Gulvāḍy mām covered about 23 shloka-s from the Shiva Mahimna Stotra and three from the phalashruti. He explained the shloka and told stories in reference to each of them. Dr. Gulvāḍy mām brought out the pivotal importance of Shiva as our Ārādhya Devatā and the bhakti towards Him through the session. 
The Kathā of Shrī Appayā Diks͟hitār was so beautifully woven with bhajana-s and the history of that period. The audience was visibly moved by the wonder that is our Sanātana Dharma.  They sat right through riveted to the narrative. 
The Puṇe Local Sabhā was blessed to have these two days of spiritual bliss in the company of Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām.

Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām was felicitated by a senior sādhaka, Shrī Sudhākar Ragaḍe.

Sāntācruz Sabhā, Mumbaī: 19th, 20th August 2023
Talk on Shiva Mahimna Stotra and the Kathā of Shrī Appayā Diks͟hitār 
A Report by Shrī Dattānand Gulvāḍy mām, President Sāntācruz Sabhā
During the current Chāturmāsa period, our Sāntācruz Sabhā had organised a satsaṅga - a talk by our Dharmaprachāraka Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām, on Saturday, 19th August 2023 and Sunday, 20th August 2023 from 5:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. at Shrīmat Ānandāshram Hall, Sāntācruz.
The topics for the talk by Dr. Chaitanya Gulwāḍy mām, were
 i) Shiva Mahimna Stotra and ii) Appayyā Dīks͟hit Kathā.
Both talks went off very well and the audience appreciated them a lot. On the first day of the satsaṅga, Dr. Gulvāḍy mām gave a very good insight about the 32 shloka-s of the Shiva Mahimna Stotra, highlighting the important shloka-s and explaining in detail their meaning with examples in the form of short stories. The audience felt enriched with the learnings from the Shiva Mahimna Stotra. They were encouraged to chant the stotra daily. The audience of 40 devotees had a very good experience and a satisfying evening during the satsaṅga.

On the second day of the satsaṅga, Dr. Gulvāḍy mām gave a talk on the renowned Saint Appayyā Dīks͟hit and vividly described with a Kathā, about the Saint’s teachings on our Sanātana Dharma. This talk was interspersed with beautiful bhajana-s in connection to Appayyā– Dīks͟hit’s Kathā. Dr. Gulvāḍy mām also conveyed in his Kathā that Appayā Dīks͟hit was a very learned Saint, well-versed in Hindu scriptures. The talk was made very interesting, and the audience numbering 50 devotees gave a lively response during the satsaṅga.
The Sāntācruz Sabhā thanked Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy mām for his talks on both the days and for giving the audience a deep insight into the Hindu scriptures. The sabhā also thanked the audience for their lively response.
Dr. Chaitanya Gulvāḍy was felicitated by Shrī Dattānand Gulvāḍy, President Sāntācruz Sabhā
