Inauguration of the Parama Pūjya Shrīmat Parijñānāshram Swāmījī III Children's Park, Tālmakīwāḍī
By  Shri Mahesh Kalyanpur

09 September 2023 was indeed a memorable day for the Chitrāpur Sāraswat community.
Brihanmumbaī Municipal Corporation had developed an amenity space next to Saṁvit Sudhā stores at Tālmakīwāḍī society, Tārdeo for the benefit of the children in the area. The authorities decided to name the Children's Play area (Bāl Gopāl Nagarī) in honour of H.H. Shrīmat Parijñānāshram Swāmījī III and the project was inaugurated on 09 September 2023 by Shrī Maṅgalprabhāt Lod͟hā, Minister for Skills Development, Government of Mahārās͟hṭra in the presence of Shrī Praveeṇ KaḍῙe, President Standing Committee, Shrī Chitrāpur Mat͟h and Shrī Sharad Ughāḍe, Asst. Commissioner, BMC D Ward. The function was attended by over 100 residents of the area.
The precincts reverberated with Jai-Jaikār-s of the Guruparamparā as soon as the silk cloth covering the name board was unveiled.
This was followed by Dīpa Prajwālana besides the photograph of H.H. Parijñānāshram Swāmījī which was decorated for the occasion, and the recitation of Shrī Parijñānāshrama Trayodashī.
It was in Tālmakīwāḍī that H.H. Shrīmat Parijñānāshram III Swāmījī had commenced the Shrī Datta Jayantī Utsava in 1986 with a view to encourage children and youngsters to develop devotion in God and a feeling of belonging, with a commitment to connect to the Mat͟h and  our Revered Guruparamparā to keep our traditions alive. Since then, Shrī Datta Jayantī Utsava has been celebrated every year and residents of the area have been participating in large numbers.
After the event, Minister Shrī Maṅgalprabhāt Lod͟hā who was instrumental in the naming of the Bāl Gopāl Nagarī after Pūjya Swāmījī, expressed his gratitude for the work undertaken by Him. He stated that for others this park may be just a children's play area but for the residents of Tālmakīwāḍī this park will be a Temple and the authorities will ensure that the sanctity of the place is maintained.

 
