Heading North with H.H. Swamiji
Yuva Sameer Masurkar shares his most memorable experiences from the Uttar Bharat Yatra of February-March 2023 
Om Shri Gurubhyo Namah
H.H. Swamiji, along with retinue and entourage, embarked on a Uttar Bharat Yatra. Since I was the only Yuva yatri until three more yuva-s joined, here is my unique experience of the Uttar Bharat Yatra. Swamiji’s yatra began at Shankaralok in Amdavad after which we headed to Shri Dungargarh, a small town steeped in spiritual history. We halted at the Vyas Ashram in Haridwar and absorbed its rich culture and spiritual significance. Next came the holy cities Pushkar and Jodhpur until we finally found ourselves at Sant Sarovar in Mt. Abu, where we concluded the yatra. After days of spiritual contemplation and peaceful reflection, the group began its homeward journey back to Karla, with sweet memories that would stay in our hearts forever. During the entire yatra, Swamiji’s teachings inspired and uplifted everyone’s spirit. By the end of the trip, the group had grown much closer, united by our shared experiences and the teachings of Swamiji. This Uttar Bharat Yatra was truly a divine blessing for all those who had the fortune of being a part of it.
The 26th Pattabhisheka Vardhanti of our beloved Mathadhipati was celebrated in Karla, after which we began the Uttar Bharat Yatra.
At Shankaralok in Amdavad the authentic Gujarati breakfast, Swadhyaya, and Kirtana by our Dharmapracharaka Dr. Chaitanya Gulvady mam were most memorable for me. In Shri Dungargarh, the Divine Mahashivaratri Char Yama pujana was held. The opportunity to chant during the fourth Yama at 4 a.m. was my second most cherished memory of the yatra.
In Pushkar, we went along with H.H. Swamiji, to the holy Brahmaji temple, said to be the only Brahma temple in the world and did dhyana at brahma muhurta. This was a unique experience just like our visit to Atamateshwar temple. However, I truly enjoyed the Samuhika Gayatri Anushthanam  and our trek to Gayatri temple where we saw the bright light as the sun rose.
At Vyas Ghat in Haridwar, taking three dips in the holy river Ganga were rejuvenating. 
The Saraswat Sammelana organized by the Vishwa Saraswat Federation (VSF) was a forum to bring together all Saraswat-s from across the globe to understand each other’s culture. The Atirudra Yajna at Jodhpur was certainly divine, but when H.H. Swamiji conducted Swadhyaya on Shivanandalahari while the Rudri patha was being recited at the Yajnashala, it made me feel blessed to be in the right place at the right time.) Vimarsha in Jodhpur was made more special/memorable) by H.H. Swamiji’s presence.
At Sant Sarovar in Mt. Abu, our interactions with Swamiji became my most cherished memory of the yatra. You will surely agree that despite all these transitory joys, the Sat Chit Ananda that is Swamiji’s presence is a lasting treasure and a guiding light for all sadhaka-s. I pray to the Gurushakti o open up the spiritual component in our lives, making our entire life a successful Yatra that culminates in Sayujyam.
