SIMOLLANGHANA 2022 in Canada
- By Kishore Kulkarni mam, Canada Sabha 
It was in the year 1979 that H.H. Shrimat Parijnanashram Swamiji III had visited Canada and observed Chaturmasa here. At it’s culmination, He performed the Simollanghana ceremonies on the banks of Credit River which flows through the Erindale Park in Mississauga, a city neighbouring Toronto. (For more, read: The Summer of ’79: A memorable Chaturmasa in Canada) [Link to https://chitrapurmath.net/news/default/story?id=192 ]

On Saturday, 10th September 2022, more than 40 sadhaka-s (including children) from and around Toronto gathered to celebrate the 43rd anniversary of that momentous occasion once again. It started with the Sabha Prarambha Prarthana, Shankha Vadana and Dipanamaskara followed by Shri Parijnanashrama Trayodashi, Parijnana Parijnana Gajari, Naivedya, Arati and the Sabha Samapti Prarthana. Thereafter we had Prasada bhojana which was offered by a member of the Laity. After the bhojana, devotees walked to the location where our beloved Guruswami had performed the Simollanghana, chanting हळ हळ चालाव), परिजञानाना भटाव. After reaching the spot, bhajana-s and nama-smarana-s were chanted.
The shoes worn by H.H. Guruswami are seen on the right
The story of the shoes worn by H.H. Parijnanashram Swamiji in Canada
- By Mrs. Maya Kulkarni, Mississauga, Canada
In August 1979 while H.H. Shrimat Parijnanashram Swamiji III was camping at the residence of late Shri Vivek and Smt. Maya Kulkarni, these were His daily shoes. He wore them everywhere, but we noticed that they were getting worn out. It was time to get Swamiji a new pair, so we did. Our Beloved Swamiji left His old shoes with us. We were extremely delighted that Swamiji left us His Blessings.
We cleaned these shoes as much as we could and kept them safely in a shoe box. Around the time of the Tercentenary (2008), we were asked if we had any mementos from Swamiji’s visit. Of course, we had these shoes which were taken to the Tercentenary celebration and shown to H.H. Shrimat Sadyojat Shankarashram Swamiji. We have been taking this pair of shoes to the Credit River for our Simollanghana celebration every year.
Left:  1979 – H.H. Shrimat Parijnanashram Swamiji III performing Pujana at the Credit river. 
Right: 2008 – H.H. Shrimat Sadyojat Shankarashram Swamiji performing puja of the kalasha-s containing
tirtha from nine holy rivers across India and Credit River from Canada.
(Guru Jyoti Yatra, 2008)
 10th September 2022: The Canada Sabha marks the 43rd Anniversary of H.H. Guruswami's Chaturmasa at 
Erindale Park, Mississauga, on the banks of the Credit River. Lower Left: Bhajana-s and nama-smarana-s 
at the spot where the  the Simollanghana ceremonies had taken place in ‘79.
 H.H. Guruswami during an outing. Canada, 1979
