Simollanghana: A Divine Experience
By Smt. Vijaya Nadkarni (Mumbai - Thane Sabha)
शरीगरभयोनमः
The concluding day of the auspicious two-month Chaturmasa period is observed as Simollanghana.  This falls on the day after Anantha Chaturdashi (Bhadrapada Shukla Purnima). Derived from the words सीमन (boundary) and उललङघनम(crossing over). Simollanghana implies crossing over the boundary afterhaving stayed in a particular place for the Chaturmasaperiod. Sadhaka-s offer the Vayaktika Sadhana-s undertaken by them during Chaturmasa at the Feet of the Devata-s and Guruparampara, with a prayer of gratitude for their successful completion. Forgiveness is also sought for any mistakes in the performance of their sadhana-s.
Pujana by H.H. Swamiji
On this day, in the early hours of the evening,H.H. Swamiji arrives at a riverbank closest to the place where He has been observing Chaturmasa (River Indrayani at Karla this year, 2022). A beautifully decorated pandal is set up and preparations for the Puja-s are made beforehand. First, Swamiji performs 'Shri Ganesha Pujana' followed by 'Adi Shankaracharya Pujana'. Watching these Puja-s is a divine experience for the sadhaka-s who gather from far and wide for this special occasion. After the puja, the sadhaka-s present join Pujya Swamiji in chanting the ' Shri Dakshinamurti Stotra'. A Bhat mam then recites one of the chapters of the Shrimad Bhagawadgita.  
H.H. Swamiji performing Adi Shankaracharya Pujana
Thereafter, H.H. Swamiji proceeds to the river where 'Ganga Pujana' is performed. Reverence to the rivers is an important part of our tradition, and no pujana is complete without 'आवाहनम' to the sacred rivers. This is our way of paying tribute to nature.
H.H. Swamiji performing GangaPujana
 After the Arati, Pujya Swamiji proceeds to a boat for ' नौकाविहार'. The boat is decorated with flowers and Swamijisails across the river to the opposite bank. The Bhat mam-s, the President of the Shri Chitrapur Math Standing Committee, and the Convener of that year’s Chaturmasa accompany H.H. Swamiji in the boat. Watching our Guru waving enthusiastically from the opposite bank provides sadhaka-s with the warm assurance-"I promise to ferry you across this samsara." The river valley reverberates with bhajana-s asPujya Swamijireturns to the eager sadhaka-s who welcome Him with 'Jaijaikara-s' and chants of 'Hara Hara Mahadeva.'
नौका विहार
 H.H. Swamiji then returns to the Math, and as the stars slowly begin to make their appearance, the sadhaka-seagerly await the ShobhaYatra.
Shobha Yatra
H.H. Swamiji ascends a Ratha that is beautifully decorated with flowers and lights, and to the beat of drums, the procession embarks. Melodious bhajana-s are sung by the sadhaka-s, children and elders alike. Looking at H.H. Swamiji, we realize "दवगररपणयता". Swamiji's radiant smile fills our heart with joy and bliss. When Pujya Swamiji waves His hand towards us, we perceive the ever-present Ashirvada and Prasada of the Gurushakti being showered on us. Sadhaka-s offer flowers, fruits and Arati to the Gurudevata.
 Shobha Yatra
The procession then returns to the Math and H.H. Swamiji alights from the Ratha where He is welcomed with a Purnakumbha Swagata. A Dharma Sabha and Shri Paduka Pujana ensue. Despite the long procession, sadhaka-s feel invigorated andare brimming with enthusiasm to listen toH.H. Swamiji's Ashirvachana. Swamiji's assuring words that everyone's sadhana has been placed at the Lotus Feet of our Parama Guru and the Guruparamparaelevates us to a higher level.As we chant the Dipanamaskara, we sincerely pray for guidance from Swamiji that we may continue to make progress on the spiritual path. 
KotiKoti Pranama-s to H.H. Swamiji and to our Divine Guruparampara.
