Inauguration of the Parama Pujya Shrimat Parijnanashram Swamiji III Children's Park, Talmakiwadi
By  Shri Mahesh Kalyanpur

09 September 2023 was indeed a memorable day for the Chitrapur Saraswat community.
Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation had developed an amenity space next to Samvit Sudha stores at Talmakiwadi society, Tardeo for the benefit of the children in the area. The authorities decided to name the Children's Play area (Bal Gopal Nagari) in honour of H.H. Shrimat Parijnanashram Swamiji III and the project was inaugurated on 09 September 2023 by Shri Mangalprabhat Lodha, Minister for Skills Development, Government of Maharashtra in the presence of Shri Praveen KadΙe, President Standing Committee, Shri Chitrapur Math and Shri Sharad Ughade, Asst. Commissioner, BMC D Ward. The function was attended by over 100 residents of the area.
The precincts reverberated with Jai-Jaikar-s of the Guruparampara as soon as the silk cloth covering the name board was unveiled.
This was followed by Dipa Prajwalana besides the photograph of H.H. Parijnanashram Swamiji which was decorated for the occasion, and the recitation of Shri Parijnanashrama Trayodashi.
It was in Talmakiwadi that H.H. Shrimat Parijnanashram III Swamiji had commenced the Shri Datta Jayanti Utsava in 1986 with a view to encourage children and youngsters to develop devotion in God and a feeling of belonging, with a commitment to connect to the Math and  our Revered Guruparampara to keep our traditions alive. Since then, Shri Datta Jayanti Utsava has been celebrated every year and residents of the area have been participating in large numbers.
After the event, Minister Shri Mangalprabhat Lodha who was instrumental in the naming of the Bal Gopal Nagari after Pujya Swamiji, expressed his gratitude for the work undertaken by Him. He stated that for others this park may be just a children's play area but for the residents of Talmakiwadi this park will be a Temple and the authorities will ensure that the sanctity of the place is maintained.
